Alamat ng Sampagita
Legend of the Sampaguita

	Back when the Kastila had recently arrived to the old country. The town of Masamyo, at the foot of Mount Bintuod, was led by Lakan Bungabong -- a paragon of leadership. He had one daughter, Liwayway, whose beauty and kindness was the talk of the town.
	Liwayway was always the princess of every celebration. She was also the first to scatter the grains of rice over ceremonies praising Idionale, the goddess of the harvest. Everyone loved to hear all of the gentle caresses of her voice as she sings the kundiman, sambotani, and other songs of the land.
	One morning while picking fruits of the trees in the jungle Liwayway was separated from her companions While searching for them she was caught by a horned deer. She grew fearful, and in trying to avoid, fell into a ravine.
	She awoke to a princely young man coming to her aid. He did not speak, but you could see the worry painted on his face. This was Datu Galing, radiant warrior and son of the chieftain of an other village.
	As one would hope they became dear friends. From then on they frequently saw each other. They were happy talking stories about anything at all. Although, the one story they never spoke was their secret love for each other.
	One day, a day they were not supposed to meet. Giling sang sadly of his secret love for Liwayway while walking through the jungle. Liwayway was also there at that moment meditating in a mulawin tree. The darling girl's heart skipped a beat and she let out a sigh.
	Liwayway stood and was going to head home to avoid being called out as a peep, but she was spotted by the young man. Before she got far Giling swept her up into his longing arms.
	The lovers were unable to contain the fountain of their love. He was a gentleman. Liwayway's love was pure and without peer. Their passion was interrupted by the sound of the tambuli and the agong.
	"Giliw [My love]," said the warrior. "tinatawag na Ako [I am being summoned]. Haharapin nami't lalabanan and mga Kastilang nais maghari sa ating lupain [We are about to face and fight the Kastila who desire to rule our lands]. Ipangako mong hindi ka lilimot [Promise you won't forget]!"
	"Ipinangangako Ko [I promise]. Ikaw lamang ang iibigin ko't mamahalin habang buhay [You're the only one I'll ever love and cherish my entire life]. At tandaan mo [And remember]: Sumpa Kita na di lilimutin [I vow to you I will not forget]!" Liwayway's words were forthright and binding.
	"Oo, sumpa Kita [Yes, I vow to you]! countered the young man. They embraced tightly before turning away."
	After a few days Liwayway received sad news. Datu Galing was slain in battle. The young maiden fell ill. Not soon she passed. The entire town of Masamyogrieved.
	A few months went by. Strange plants with white heart-shaped flowers grew over Liwayway's grave. It grew thickly and quickly spread.
	"Sumpa Kita [I vow to you]!" pronounce the hearts who understand when exchanging fresh bouquets of the blossoming plant. Soon the people called beautiful flower by the same phrase. As time rolled on "Sumpa Kita" smoothed into "Sampagita".
